docs/configuration.md, before:

# Configuration Guide

This guide covers all configuration options for the Zen MCP Server. The server is configured through environment variables defined in your `.env` file.

## Quick Start Configuration

**Auto Mode (Recommended):** Set `DEFAULT_MODEL=auto` and let Claude intelligently select the best model for each task:

```env
# Basic configuration
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
GEMINI_API_KEY=your-gemini-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-key
```

## Complete Configuration Reference

### Required Configuration

**Workspace Root:**
```env
# Required: Workspace root directory for file access
WORKSPACE_ROOT=/Users/your-username
```
- Path that contains all files Claude might reference
- Defaults to `$HOME` for direct usage, auto-configured for Docker

### API Keys (At least one required)

**Important:** Use EITHER OpenRouter OR native APIs, not both! Having both creates ambiguity about which provider serves each model.

**Option 1: Native APIs (Recommended for direct access)**
```env
# Google Gemini API
GEMINI_API_KEY=your_gemini_api_key_here
# Get from: https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey

# OpenAI API  
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key_here
# Get from: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys

# X.AI GROK API
XAI_API_KEY=your_xai_api_key_here
# Get from: https://console.x.ai/
```

**Option 2: OpenRouter (Access multiple models through one API)**
```env
# OpenRouter for unified model access
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key_here
# Get from: https://openrouter.ai/
# If using OpenRouter, comment out native API keys above
```

**Option 3: Custom API Endpoints (Local models)**
```env
# For Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio, etc.
# IMPORTANT: Use host.docker.internal, NOT localhost (Docker requirement)
CUSTOM_API_URL=http://host.docker.internal:11434/v1  # Ollama example
CUSTOM_API_KEY=                                      # Empty for Ollama
CUSTOM_MODEL_NAME=llama3.2                          # Default model
```

**Docker Network Requirements:**
- ❌ WRONG: `http://localhost:11434/v1` (Docker containers cannot reach localhost)
- ✅ CORRECT: `http://host.docker.internal:11434/v1` (Docker can reach host services)

### Model Configuration

**Default Model Selection:**
```env
# Options: 'auto', 'pro', 'flash', 'o3', 'o3-mini', 'o4-mini', 'o4-mini-high', etc.
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto  # Claude picks best model for each task (recommended)
```

**Available Models:**
- **`auto`**: Claude automatically selects the optimal model
- **`pro`** (Gemini 2.5 Pro): Extended thinking, deep analysis
- **`flash`** (Gemini 2.0 Flash): Ultra-fast responses  
- **`o3`**: Strong logical reasoning (200K context)
- **`o3-mini`**: Balanced speed/quality (200K context)
- **`o4-mini`**: Latest reasoning model, optimized for shorter contexts
- **`o4-mini-high`**: Enhanced O4 with higher reasoning effort
- **`grok`**: GROK-3 advanced reasoning (131K context)
- **Custom models**: via OpenRouter or local APIs

### Thinking Mode Configuration

**Default Thinking Mode for ThinkDeep:**
```env
# Only applies to models supporting extended thinking (e.g., Gemini 2.5 Pro)
DEFAULT_THINKING_MODE_THINKDEEP=high

# Available modes and token consumption:
#   minimal: 128 tokens   - Quick analysis, fastest response
#   low:     2,048 tokens - Light reasoning tasks  
#   medium:  8,192 tokens - Balanced reasoning
#   high:    16,384 tokens - Complex analysis (recommended for thinkdeep)
#   max:     32,768 tokens - Maximum reasoning depth
```

### Model Usage Restrictions

Control which models can be used from each provider for cost control, compliance, or standardization:

```env
# Format: Comma-separated list (case-insensitive, whitespace tolerant)
# Empty or unset = all models allowed (default)

# OpenAI model restrictions
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o3-mini,o4-mini,mini

# Gemini model restrictions  
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash,pro

# X.AI GROK model restrictions
XAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=grok-3,grok-3-fast

# OpenRouter model restrictions (affects models via custom provider)
OPENROUTER_ALLOWED_MODELS=opus,sonnet,mistral
```

**Supported Model Names:**

**OpenAI Models:**
- `o3` (200K context, high reasoning)
- `o3-mini` (200K context, balanced)
- `o4-mini` (200K context, latest balanced)
- `o4-mini-high` (200K context, enhanced reasoning)
- `mini` (shorthand for o4-mini)

**Gemini Models:**
- `gemini-2.5-flash-preview-05-20` (1M context, fast)
- `gemini-2.5-pro-preview-06-05` (1M context, powerful)
- `flash` (shorthand for Flash model)
- `pro` (shorthand for Pro model)

**X.AI GROK Models:**
- `grok-3` (131K context, advanced reasoning)
- `grok-3-fast` (131K context, higher performance)
- `grok` (shorthand for grok-3)
- `grok3` (shorthand for grok-3)
- `grokfast` (shorthand for grok-3-fast)

**Example Configurations:**
```env
# Cost control - only cheap models
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o4-mini
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash

# Single model standardization
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o4-mini
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=pro

# Balanced selection
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash,pro
XAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=grok,grok-3-fast
```

### Advanced Configuration

**Custom Model Configuration:**
```env
# Override default location of custom_models.json
CUSTOM_MODELS_CONFIG_PATH=/path/to/your/custom_models.json
```

**Redis Configuration:**
```env
# Redis URL for conversation threading (auto-configured for Docker)
REDIS_URL=redis://redis:6379/0
```

**Conversation Settings:**
```env
# How long AI-to-AI conversation threads persist (hours)
CONVERSATION_TIMEOUT_HOURS=3

# Maximum conversation turns (each exchange = 2 turns)
MAX_CONVERSATION_TURNS=20
```

**Logging Configuration:**
```env
# Logging level: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG  # Default: shows detailed operational messages
```

## Configuration Examples

### Development Setup
```env
# Development with multiple providers
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
GEMINI_API_KEY=your-gemini-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-key
XAI_API_KEY=your-xai-key
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
CONVERSATION_TIMEOUT_HOURS=1
```

### Production Setup
```env
# Production with cost controls
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
GEMINI_API_KEY=your-gemini-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-key
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o4-mini
LOG_LEVEL=INFO
CONVERSATION_TIMEOUT_HOURS=3
```

### Local Development
```env
# Local models only
DEFAULT_MODEL=llama3.2
CUSTOM_API_URL=http://host.docker.internal:11434/v1
CUSTOM_API_KEY=
CUSTOM_MODEL_NAME=llama3.2
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
```

### OpenRouter Only
```env
# Single API for multiple models
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your-openrouter-key
OPENROUTER_ALLOWED_MODELS=opus,sonnet,gpt-4
LOG_LEVEL=INFO
```

## Important Notes

**Docker Networking:**
- Always use `host.docker.internal` instead of `localhost` for custom APIs
- The server runs in Docker and cannot access `localhost` directly

**API Key Priority:**
- Native APIs take priority over OpenRouter when both are configured
- Avoid configuring both native and OpenRouter for the same models

**Model Restrictions:**
- Apply to all usage including auto mode
- Empty/unset = all models allowed
- Invalid model names are warned about at startup

**Configuration Changes:**
- Restart the server with `./run-server.sh` after changing `.env`
- Configuration is loaded once at startup

## Related Documentation

- **[Advanced Usage Guide](advanced-usage.md)** - Advanced model usage patterns, thinking modes, and power user workflows
- **[Context Revival Guide](context-revival.md)** - Conversation persistence and context revival across sessions
- **[AI-to-AI Collaboration Guide](ai-collaboration.md)** - Multi-model coordination and conversation threading

Commit message:

Migration from docker to standalone server Migration handling Fixed tests Use simpler in-memory storage Support for concurrent logging to disk Simplified direct connections to localhost

docs/configuration.md, after:

# Configuration Guide

This guide covers all configuration options for the Zen MCP Server. The server is configured through environment variables defined in your `.env` file.

## Quick Start Configuration

**Auto Mode (Recommended):** Set `DEFAULT_MODEL=auto` and let Claude intelligently select the best model for each task:

```env
# Basic configuration
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
GEMINI_API_KEY=your-gemini-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-key
```

## Complete Configuration Reference

### Required Configuration

**Workspace Root:**
```env

### API Keys (At least one required)

**Important:** Use EITHER OpenRouter OR native APIs, not both! Having both creates ambiguity about which provider serves each model.

**Option 1: Native APIs (Recommended for direct access)**
```env
# Google Gemini API
GEMINI_API_KEY=your_gemini_api_key_here
# Get from: https://makersuite.google.com/app/apikey

# OpenAI API  
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key_here
# Get from: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys

# X.AI GROK API
XAI_API_KEY=your_xai_api_key_here
# Get from: https://console.x.ai/
```

**Option 2: OpenRouter (Access multiple models through one API)**
```env
# OpenRouter for unified model access
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key_here
# Get from: https://openrouter.ai/
# If using OpenRouter, comment out native API keys above
```

**Option 3: Custom API Endpoints (Local models)**
```env
# For Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio, etc.
CUSTOM_API_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1  # Ollama example
CUSTOM_API_KEY=                                      # Empty for Ollama
CUSTOM_MODEL_NAME=llama3.2                          # Default model
```

**Local Model Connection:**
- Use standard localhost URLs since the server runs natively
- Example: `http://localhost:11434/v1` for Ollama

### Model Configuration

**Default Model Selection:**
```env
# Options: 'auto', 'pro', 'flash', 'o3', 'o3-mini', 'o4-mini', 'o4-mini-high', etc.
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto  # Claude picks best model for each task (recommended)
```

**Available Models:**
- **`auto`**: Claude automatically selects the optimal model
- **`pro`** (Gemini 2.5 Pro): Extended thinking, deep analysis
- **`flash`** (Gemini 2.0 Flash): Ultra-fast responses  
- **`o3`**: Strong logical reasoning (200K context)
- **`o3-mini`**: Balanced speed/quality (200K context)
- **`o4-mini`**: Latest reasoning model, optimized for shorter contexts
- **`o4-mini-high`**: Enhanced O4 with higher reasoning effort
- **`grok`**: GROK-3 advanced reasoning (131K context)
- **Custom models**: via OpenRouter or local APIs

### Thinking Mode Configuration

**Default Thinking Mode for ThinkDeep:**
```env
# Only applies to models supporting extended thinking (e.g., Gemini 2.5 Pro)
DEFAULT_THINKING_MODE_THINKDEEP=high

# Available modes and token consumption:
#   minimal: 128 tokens   - Quick analysis, fastest response
#   low:     2,048 tokens - Light reasoning tasks  
#   medium:  8,192 tokens - Balanced reasoning
#   high:    16,384 tokens - Complex analysis (recommended for thinkdeep)
#   max:     32,768 tokens - Maximum reasoning depth
```

### Model Usage Restrictions

Control which models can be used from each provider for cost control, compliance, or standardization:

```env
# Format: Comma-separated list (case-insensitive, whitespace tolerant)
# Empty or unset = all models allowed (default)

# OpenAI model restrictions
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o3-mini,o4-mini,mini

# Gemini model restrictions  
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash,pro

# X.AI GROK model restrictions
XAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=grok-3,grok-3-fast

# OpenRouter model restrictions (affects models via custom provider)
OPENROUTER_ALLOWED_MODELS=opus,sonnet,mistral
```

**Supported Model Names:**

**OpenAI Models:**
- `o3` (200K context, high reasoning)
- `o3-mini` (200K context, balanced)
- `o4-mini` (200K context, latest balanced)
- `o4-mini-high` (200K context, enhanced reasoning)
- `mini` (shorthand for o4-mini)

**Gemini Models:**
- `gemini-2.5-flash-preview-05-20` (1M context, fast)
- `gemini-2.5-pro-preview-06-05` (1M context, powerful)
- `flash` (shorthand for Flash model)
- `pro` (shorthand for Pro model)

**X.AI GROK Models:**
- `grok-3` (131K context, advanced reasoning)
- `grok-3-fast` (131K context, higher performance)
- `grok` (shorthand for grok-3)
- `grok3` (shorthand for grok-3)
- `grokfast` (shorthand for grok-3-fast)

**Example Configurations:**
```env
# Cost control - only cheap models
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o4-mini
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash

# Single model standardization
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o4-mini
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=pro

# Balanced selection
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash,pro
XAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=grok,grok-3-fast
```

### Advanced Configuration

**Custom Model Configuration:**
```env
# Override default location of custom_models.json
CUSTOM_MODELS_CONFIG_PATH=/path/to/your/custom_models.json
```

**Conversation Settings:**
```env
# How long AI-to-AI conversation threads persist in memory (hours)
# Conversations are auto-purged when claude closes its MCP connection or 
# when a session is quit / re-launched 
CONVERSATION_TIMEOUT_HOURS=5

# Maximum conversation turns (each exchange = 2 turns)
MAX_CONVERSATION_TURNS=20
```

**Logging Configuration:**
```env
# Logging level: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG  # Default: shows detailed operational messages
```

## Configuration Examples

### Development Setup
```env
# Development with multiple providers
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
GEMINI_API_KEY=your-gemini-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-key
XAI_API_KEY=your-xai-key
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
CONVERSATION_TIMEOUT_HOURS=1
```

### Production Setup
```env
# Production with cost controls
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
GEMINI_API_KEY=your-gemini-key
OPENAI_API_KEY=your-openai-key
GOOGLE_ALLOWED_MODELS=flash
OPENAI_ALLOWED_MODELS=o4-mini
LOG_LEVEL=INFO
CONVERSATION_TIMEOUT_HOURS=3
```

### Local Development
```env
# Local models only
DEFAULT_MODEL=llama3.2
CUSTOM_API_URL=http://localhost:11434/v1
CUSTOM_API_KEY=
CUSTOM_MODEL_NAME=llama3.2
LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG
```

### OpenRouter Only
```env
# Single API for multiple models
DEFAULT_MODEL=auto
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your-openrouter-key
OPENROUTER_ALLOWED_MODELS=opus,sonnet,gpt-4
LOG_LEVEL=INFO
```

## Important Notes

**Local Networking:**
- Use standard localhost URLs for local models
- The server runs as a native Python process

**API Key Priority:**
- Native APIs take priority over OpenRouter when both are configured
- Avoid configuring both native and OpenRouter for the same models

**Model Restrictions:**
- Apply to all usage including auto mode
- Empty/unset = all models allowed
- Invalid model names are warned about at startup

**Configuration Changes:**
- Restart the server with `./run-server.sh` after changing `.env`
- Configuration is loaded once at startup

## Related Documentation

- **[Advanced Usage Guide](advanced-usage.md)** - Advanced model usage patterns, thinking modes, and power user workflows
- **[Context Revival Guide](context-revival.md)** - Conversation persistence and context revival across sessions
- **[AI-to-AI Collaboration Guide](ai-collaboration.md)** - Multi-model coordination and conversation threading
